
# At a snail’s pace: the influence of habitat disturbance on terrestrial snail movement using experimentally manipulated mesocosms

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/420157151.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/420157151)

-   Authors:
    -   Emily Denief
    -   [Julie W. Turner](https://www.julwturner.com)
    -   Christina Prokopenko
    -   [Alec L. Robitaille](http://robitalec.ca)
    -   [Eric Vander Wal](http://weel.gitlab.io)

This repository contains the code accompanying the paper “At a snail’s
pace: the influence of habitat disturbance on terrestrial snail movement
using experimentally manipulated mesocosms”.

This project depends on some incredible R packages. We use
[`targets`](https://github.com/ropensci/targets) for declaring the
workflow and [`renv`](https://github.com/rstudio/renv) for a
reproducible environment. General processing using
[`data.table`](https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table) and plotting
with [`ggplot2`](https://github.com/tidyverse/ggplot2) and
[`patchwork`](https://github.com/thomasp85/patchwork). iSSA methods with
[`amt`](https://github.com/jmsigner/amt), `raster` and `sf`, modeling
with [`glmmTMB`](https://github.com/glmmTMB/glmmTMB/) and `lme4`.

## Abstract

The Anthropocene marks great changes to environments and the animals
that inhabit them. Changes, such as disturbance, can affect the manner
in which animals interact with their environments, such as moving and
selecting habitats. To test how animals might respond to changing
disturbance regimes, we employ an experimental approach to movement
ecology. We used integrated step selection analysis (iSSA) to test the
behavioural responses of individually-marked grove snails (*Cepaea
nemoralis*) exposed to a gradient of physical disturbance in their
habitat. We used a before-after control-impact (BACI) experimental
design within semi-controlled mesocosms to manipulate edge and
disturbance variables by altering the area of the mesocosm covered by
bricks. We showed that grove snails perceive edges of enclosures and
edges of bricks as risks, and responded to such risks by altering their
movement. Grove snails displayed a bimodal response to risk by taking
shelter in place or moving faster to be farther from the disturbance.
Furthermore, individuals tended to modulate their behavioural response
to the degree of risk. Our study highlights the usefulness of
experimental mesocosms in movement ecology and in determining the
effects of habitat alteration and human-imposed risk on movement
behaviour.
